Contributing to java-gnome

We'd love to have you contribute by hacking on the bindings themselves!

This document is divided into three parts:

 1. Getting started
 2. Technical issues
 3. Style guide

GETTING STARTED
===============

Checkout the source code
------------------------

We are using Bazaar-NG as our version control tool. More commonly known as
`bzr`, it is an advanced third-generation VCS.

    bzr branch http://research.operationaldynamics.com/bzr/java-gnome/
    cd java-gnome
    ./configure
    make

See the instructions in README for how to install from a source tarball and
what options you can supply to Equivalence's `./configure` script.

Doing your own thing
--------------------

The amazing thing about the decentralized VCS tools is that you do not need to
be online to make commits. But it's more than that -- you don't need to be me
to make commits! You can work away on your own branch(es) and then send your
patches _in already committed form_ to me for consideration and merging.

This is a vitally important point: no one can tell you you can't work on
something. And of you want to share it, go right ahead. That said, if you'd
like to see your work merged into the mainline and released publicly, then
we'd encourage you to follow the stylistic guidelines laid out below.

Why `bzr`?
----------

We are using `bzr` at the moment for its relative straight forwardness.
Anyone used to using the old world tools like CVS or Subversion will be able
to make sense of it and you can learn from there. While Bazaar could be a
lot perkier in terms of its responsiveness, but it is improving rapidly. The
fact that it has a vibrant community, is widely portable, and most of all that
the development team actually have an enormous unit test suite to keep them
honest biases in their favour.


TECHNICAL DETAILS
=================

The java-gnome 4.x bindings are pretty straight forward, so in terms of adding
new coverage you can probably pick things up by example fairly easily. But you
really should take the time to understand *why* things work, or you won't be
able to understand the mechanisms involved behind the scene.

API design and overall system architecture 
------------------------------------------

In the `doc/design/` subdirectory you will find condensed versions of the
various mailing list discussions that lead to the current design. You are
encouraged to peruse these files; the document on Architecture is pretty much
required reading if you want to understand what's going on.

STYLE GUIDE
===========

Things like how you format your code, what editor you use, etc are all very
personal issues, but for a project to function with anything even remotely
resembling sanity, there need to be some standards and conventions. This
document outlines the style guidelines you'll need to know if hacking on the
java-gnome 4.x bindings.

Code formatting
---------------

The code formatting tools available in modern IDEs are nothing short of
miraculous.

Eclipse in particular has an outstanding code formatter that is highly
configurable. This encourages people to tinker and have their code be just the
way they like it.

We ended up adopting what Eclipse termed the "Java conventions [builtin]",
with four modifications. Notably, this default Java style is set to convert
tabs to 4 spaces. I personally prefer `\t` characters, but it makes a mess
when looking at diffs or raw files because the terminal expands tabs to 8. So
I'll buy this one -- better that your code looks correct at all times.

The modifications are:

 * The opening brace on a Class statement is on its own line, not on the same
   line as the declaration. This is largely to provide some visual
   distinctness to the nested interfaces that contain our signal handler
   callbacks. Otherwise, they look too much like methods and it's very
   confusing to read.

 * The code width is 105 characters. The default of 80 causes so much wrapping
   to render it unreadable - especially in things like the Constant Object
   declarations in Enums and Flags.

 * Comment with is 78 characters. The default of 80 would be fine, except that
   when you view the changes to a file with the version control tool's diff
   command, the `+` and `-` character push the line out past the to the 80
   character mark, and that's no good in the standard 80 character wide
   terminal where you ran the command in the first place.

 * empty methods have both braces on the same line. We've got quite a number
   of private constructors which are empty and just serve to prevent the class
   showing up as an option when doing `new G`**<COMPLETE>**. An empty method
   with a blank line in it appears to the eye to be unfinished, and so we want
   to avoid that distraction.


Your patches have a much better chance of being accepted if they produce clean
diffs, and that's more likely to happen if you stick to these rules. If you're
using Eclipse, you will find "The java-gnome Style" pre-configured in the
.settings/ directory. Just hitting Format should do the trick.

(Come on Sun boys and girls! Make me believe that NetBeans is better...)


COMMITS
=======

One problem with standard text editor is that they word wrap at a default of
the normal terminal width, 80 characters. This is a problem when viewing
commit messages because VCS tools typically indent the message by a few
whitespace characters, resulting in insanely ugly wrapping when viewing commit
logs in a terminal window.

Therefore, lines in commit messages should be no longer than 70 characters.

Try putting the following fragment in your `.vimrc`:

	
	if expand("%:t") =~ "^bzr_log*"
		set textwidth=70
		set filetype=none
		syn match commitComment "^#.*"
		hi link commitComment Comment
	endif


While you're at it, you might want

	if expand("%:e") == "java"
		set nowrap
		set ts=4
	endif



DOCUMENTATION
=============

Text files
----------

Documentation such as design documents and files like this one are almost
always viewed in terminals using pagers like `less`. It does no one any good
if the paragraphs run off into the netherworld off the right of the screen
somewhere.

Therefore, all textual documentation should be word wrapped at 78 characters,
the same as for JavaDoc comments. If you look at the bottom of this file,
you'll see a vim modeline which will takes care of it for this file.

The exception, of course, is source code fragments. If they run on past the 78
character mark, then so be it it.

JavaDoc
-------

Don't bother putting class names in `<code>` spans. You'd never get anything
done.

There's no reason to `@link` ever single class name either. JavaDoc is
already full of cross references. Only put a `@link` tag in when you really
think that someone should follow the link to the doc snippet you're pointing
at.

Getters and setters are a bit obvious. If the single sentence you write for
`getLabel()` is "Get the text of the Label on the Button" and the method
returns String, then there's not much need to put a `@returns` clause in. If
unusual things happen in parameters or return values (for example `null` is an
acceptable argument, or a return of `-1` indicates success) then definitely
explain it in a `@param` or `@return` clause!

Please take the trouble to write out a bit of supplementary text for a link so
that you positively control what text appears. Otherwise you can end up with
fully qualified class names and all sorts of other ugliness which distract
from the flow of the paragraph. For example, if you just do:

		/**
		 * For more details, see {@link org.gnome.gtk.Button#setLabel(java.lang.String)}.
		 */

You end up with "For more details, see
<u>org.gnome.gtk.Button.setLabel(java.gnome.String)</u>." Bleh! So try adding
a bit of extra text to make it more natural:

		/**
		 * For more details, see Button's {@link org.gnome.gtk.Button#setLabel(java.lang.String) setLabel()}.
		 */

This will render as "For more details, see Button's <u>setLabel()</u>." Much
better.

As a matter of consistency, if you are referring to a static method, say:

		Gtk.init()
		
but to talk about an instance method, use the possessive, eg:

		Button's setLabel()

Obviously the whole point of java-gnome is to wrap GTK and the other GNOME
libraries. Unfortunately, however the doxygen documentation for GLib, GTK and
friends, while extensive, is _quite_ inappropriate for someone brand-new to
GTK or {Linux,Solaris}. Therefore, in order to achieve the criterion of
**Approachability** that we defined as our primary goal, considerable
massaging and indeed complete rewriting is necessary. Use a friendly, casual,
and colloquial style... and don't forget an example snippet! Methods like
Widget's `show()`, the entire Button class, and the signal Window.DELETE are
all good examples.

Finally, where it is appropriate to discuss how our implementation varies from
conventional GTK practice, use a paragraph all in _italics_ at the end of the
class's JavaDoc to explain the divergence or how java-gnome is implemented.
The comment at the top of org.gnome.glib.Object is a pretty good example of
this. But other than these rare observations, don't refer to the translation,
native, JNI layers or the native library [call] itself at all! Whenever
possible, we want the implementation details of java-gnome to be invisible.
They're not `public` after all!

Spelling
--------

And for super bonus points, run a spellchecker over any documentation you
contribute. Yes, on code too!

We use `LANG=en_CA` around here, but **don't worry if your written English
isn't very strong** or if you speak American. What matters is that you're
contributing and a native English speaker like myself will be more than happy
to fix it up.

CONCLUSION
==========

The opportunity to work on something you love is the greatest experience you
can have. If you choose to offer code you write, be it towards helping us on
this project or on any other endeavour whatsoever, I encourage you to choose
to let others use your work as Software Libre and in your own turn help people
find their own passion and excitement. By your actions you lift us all up. I
hope you'll join us!

Apotheosis Rising.

AfC

`--`  
Andrew Frederick Cowie  
Managing Director  
[Operational Dynamics](http://www.operationaldynamics.com/),
a Change Management consultancy.  

<!-- vim: set textwidth=78 nowrap: -->
