Style guide: Commit Messages

It might seem a bit anal to ask people to follow certain conventions when
writing their commit messages, but reading code history is a big part of
debugging, and its a lot easier when things are consistent. So, please keep
the following in mind:

Complete ideas preferred over one-liners
----------------------------------------

I'd prefer patches that are complete and comprehensive; one liner bug fixes
are fine when necessary (ie, if that's all it is) but if, say, you're adding
support for a new distro to the top level configure script, commit it as one
complete patch rather than 5 small ones.

Of course at slightly larger levels of aggregation, series of patches chain
together, and that's what branches are for. I'm not worried in the slightest
what the branch tree ends up looking like, but I would request that if you do
a specific piece of work try and do it an a little local branch, at least
initially, so that the work groups together nicely when it comes time to
merge it into your main branch en route to being sent to me for merging into
mainline. 

Summary line and revision text
------------------------------

Bazaar, like all other modern VCS tools, uses the first line of the commit
message as the summary which appears in email Subject: lines, the `--line`
output to `bzr log`, etc. So a descriptive yet concise first line is
important.

For really trivial fixes, that single line as patch name is sufficient; but
for more comprehensive patches please add a long comment (ie the subject line
_plus_ some prose describing what you're up to. It doesn't have to be perfect.

Remember that years from now someone will do `bzr log filename` and all the
revisions which affected that one file will show. So if you can, try to keep
commits on-topic; you don't have to mention every last little change but try
your best to summarize the impact on major files if they're somewhat
tangential to the main thrust of the rest of the commit.

Max message width 70 characters!
--------------------------------

One problem with standard text editor is that they word wrap at a default of
the normal terminal width, 80 characters. This is a problem when viewing
commit messages because VCS tools typically indent the message by a few
whitespace characters, resulting in insanely ugly wrapping when viewing commit
logs in a terminal window.

Therefore, **lines in commit messages must be no longer than 70 characters**.

I forgot once and it looks stupid: see `bzr log --short -r 14`. Too late now.
But to prevent this from happening again, try and ensure your editor knows
about the width limit. Vim users can put the following fragment in their
`.vimrc`:

	if expand("%:t") =~ "^bzr_log*"
		set textwidth=70
		set filetype=none
		syn match commitComment "^#.*"
		hi link commitComment Comment
	endif

While you're at it, you might want

	if expand("%:e") == "java"
		set nowrap
		set ts=4
	endif

to make sure a casual edit of a Java source file doesn't mess it up.

AfC

_Originally written by Andrew Cowie 2 Dec 06. Last modified 9 Dec 06._

<!--

  Copyright (c) 2006 Operational Dynamics Consulting Pty Ltd 

  As project documentation, this file forms an integral part of the source
  code of the library it accompanies, and thus is made available to you by the
  authors under the terms of the "GNU General Public Licence, version 2". See
  the LICENCE file for the terms governing usage, copying and redistribution.

  vim: set textwidth=78 nowrap:

-->
